---
layout: page
title: The KC85
---

## The KC85 Computer Series

The KC85 was a series of 8-bit computers built in Eastern
Germany from the mid-80's until the fall of the Iron Curtain in 1989. 
 
KC means 'Kleincomputer' or 'Small Computer', this was an umbrella name
for 6 different computer models with partially very different hardware 
designs and from 2 different manufacturers:

- **KC85/2 (originally HC-900), KC85/3, KC85/4**: this is the KC 'main-line' built 
by the 'VEB Mikroelektronikkombinat Mühlhausen'
- **KC85/1 (originally Z9001), KC87**: the Z9001 and its successor the KC87
were built by 'Robotron Dresden', they had a different hardware architecture
and were incompatible with the KC85/2-based mainline
- **KC Compact**: this was a Amstrad CPC clone from Mühlhausen and came out too
late to make any impact

Following, I will concentrate on the computers spawned by the HC-900: the
KC85/2, KC85/3 and KC85/4.

(TODO: photos)

### Hardware Specs

All computers of the KC85/2 line had a U880 CPU (an 'unlicensed' Z80 clone),
running at 1.75MHz (KC85/2 and /3) or 1.77MHz (KC85/4). There were no 
custom chips for video and audio (so more like a ZX Spectrum than a C64).

All models could display 320x256 pixels at 16 foreground and 8 background
colors, but with a limited color resolution: the KC85/2 and KC85/3 could 
only assign one foreground and one background color to a block of 8x4 pixels,
this was improved in the KC85/4 to 8x1 pixels (again, this handling of
color information is quite similar to the ZX Spectrum).

The different models differed most in their RAM configuration:

- **KC85/2**: 16KByte general RAM, 16KByte video RAM, 4 KByte ROM 
- **KC85/3**: some RAM config as KC85/2, but the operating system ROM was increased 
to 8 KByte, and a built-in 8KByte BASIC ROM was added
- **KC85/4**: the 85/4 was a memory monster, it had 64 KByte general RAM, 64 KByte
video RAM (2 16-KByte pages for pixels, and 2 16-KByte pages for colors) and
20 KByte ROM (8+4 KByte operating system, and 8 KByte BASIC)

The KC85/4 has much improved video capabilities due to its massive 64 KByte
video RAM divided into 4 independent memory banks:

- the color resolution was improved to 8x1 pixels
- the CPU could write to 'hidden' memory banks, making true double-buffering
possible
- a special high-color mode allowed to assign per-pixel colors, but only
with 4 different colors
- the video memory layout was 90 degrees rotated (writing to continuous 
addresses in video memory would fill vertical columns on screen), this
greatly simplified video memory addressing and common tasks like vertical
scrolling

The video-scanout was not programmable in any way though, so fancy scrolling 
tricks were not possible, all rendering had to be done 'manually' with the CPU.


### Modular Hardware and Software

The KC85/2 based series has a fairly unique modular hardware and software
concept. On the hardware side, the base device offered 2 slots for expansion
modules, and additional slots could be added by stacking 'bus-driver' devices
on top of the base device, each adding 4 more slots. Theoretically, up to 4
MByte RAM could be added through expansion slots (although I think in practice
this was impossible because the signals would become too weak and noisy).

The most popular expansion modules were 16 and 64 KByte RAM modules, 
ROM modules for BASIC, FORTH and assembly development (each only 8 Kbyte big), 
serial and parallel interface modules, and 'pass-through' modules for hobbyists to
interface with their hardware.

On the software side, the built-in operating system named 'CAOS' (for Cassette-
Aided-Operating-System) was also designed with modularity and extensibility
in mind. All shell commands of the operating system had a specific
header in memory (2 bytes '7F 7F', followed by the command name, followed by 
a 01, followed by the machine code to execute). User-written programs could
expose their functionality through such standardized command headers. The 
operating system could build the list of available commands by scanning the
RAM for the magic '7F 7F' headers.

This expansibility on the hardware and software side allowed for a very 
nice working environment, it was possible to switch between different
development environments like BASIC and FORTH by bank-switching their ROM-
modules in and out, or one could extend existing development environments
by adding custom-commands to them.


